REP153: adding metadata to the index file (#181)
ros-infrastructure/rep: rep-0153.rst

REP: 153
Title: ROS distribution files
Author: Dirk Thomas <dthomas@osrfoundation.org>
Status: Final
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 27-Oct-2018
Post-History: 27-Oct-2018

.. contents::

Abstract
========
This REP updates the specification of the ROS distribution files facilitated in
the building, packaging, testing and documenting process.

The intention is to annotate a ROS distribution with more information (like the

> "major" version (``1`` or``2``) to avoid the need to externally define and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"major" version (``1`` or ``2``) to avoid the need to externally define and
```

The missing space messes with formatting.

> update these metadata.

Reviewer: Do we need to update this intent sentence now?

Author: I am not sure what is unclear / not up-to-date atm. Please suggest an update.

Reviewer: The example in the abstract still seems to belong more to the original proposal than the updated one. Since the ROS "major" version is described by the `distribution_type` key but the value we intend to use is not `1` or `2` but `ros1` or `ros2`.

Can't use the suggestion GUI for a multiline change.

```
The intention is to annotate a ROS distribution with more information,
such as whether the distribution should use ROS 1 or ROS 2 semantics,
to avoid the need to externally define and update these metadata.
```

Author: Sounds good to me: d7c643e577b2dacde73c82ad97bd0c6f4aa66002

This REP is an extension to the file format defined in REP 143[1]_.
It currently does not repeat the content of REP 143 but only states the
differences.

Motivation
==========

For the following use cases additional metadata is currently necessary:

> A. The ROS buildfarm has to distinguish ROS 1 distributions from ROS 2

Reviewer 2: I didn't think that standard markdown had lettered lists.

> A. The ROS buildfarm has to distinguish ROS 1 distributions from ROS 2

Author: Using numbers as of 94e8e7852772df11c092e168959b381c119516cb.

REP: 153
Title: ROS distribution files
Author: Dirk Thomas <dthomas@osrfoundation.org>
Status: Final
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 27-Oct-2018
Post-History: 27-Oct-2018

.. contents::

Abstract
========
This REP updates the specification of the ROS distribution files facilitated in
the building, packaging, testing and documenting process.

The intention is to annotate ROS version with their major version (``1`` or
``2``) and avoid the need to externally define and update a classification of

> ROS distribution names as ROS 1 or ROS 2.

Reviewer 3: It seems to me that all that is needed to be specified here is the toolchain used for the given distro (e.g. catkin vs colcon?). It says so here https://github.com/ros2/ros_buildfarm_config/pull/12 ("The ros_version is necessary to decide about the installation of the catkin or ros-workspace package without the need to hardcode ROS distro names in the ros_buildfarm code")
This could be added to the REP as an example for the usage, btw.

One can imagine the possibility of distributions from 2 ROS major versions sharing the same toolchain one day. And more easily one can imagine a situation where distributions from the same ROS major version use two different toolchains (such as rosbuild and catkin for ROS1, exagerrating the technical issues only slightly).
So merely storing the ROS major version as an integer seems limiting, whereas storing the toolchain name seems to solve the problem at hand sufficiently and transparently.

Even if you have other resons to want to store ROS version numbers in the ROS distribution files, you still have to justify why not using the full semantic versioning, or version strings (given whatever purpose might arise in the future might have to discriminate between minor versions). Integers make for poor identifiers.

Apart from that, using 'ros_' as a prefix for a key tightly binds rosdistro as a tool to the ROS ecosystem and the ROS brand, which is slightly against the philosophy of creating flexible open-source tools that can be re-used for various projects (however unlikely that may seem right now).

If you still persist that you really, really just need the ROS major version as an integer, at least name the key "major_version".

Author: > Even if you have other resons to want to store ROS version numbers in the ROS distribution files, you still have to justify why not using the full semantic versioning, or version strings (given whatever purpose might arise in the future might have to discriminate between minor versions).

@tkruse "Semantic versioning" of ROS distros? That sounds bizarre to me since the definition of semver would imply that every distro must be a new major version (since at least something will be 
a breaking change) which would make all other parts of the version irrelevant. Imo a versioning scheme across such a large number of federated packages doesn't make any sense. Please feel free to propose something if you think otherwise. Atm I don't foresee a use case not satisfied by a single number. If you have one in mind please bring it up and changing the type can certainly be considered.

> using 'ros_' as a prefix for a key tightly binds rosdistro as a tool to the ROS ecosystem and the ROS brand, which is slightly against the philosophy of creating flexible open-source tools that can be re-used for various projects
> ...
> ... at least name the key "major_version".

I am not too worried about a "ros_" prefix in a database named `rosdistro` which is accessed by a Python package named `rosdistro`. The terminology of "major version" comes with a semantic meaning I am not sure is adequate in this case. Maybe there are other suggestions for naming the newly added key?

> Splitting the data concerning one distribution between index.yaml and distribution.yaml can cause further unnecessary headaches.

On distribution entry in the index file can have N distribution files. Therefore the version information should go into the index file. Otherwise nothing would prevent you from having multiple contradicting distribution files for a single distro.

Reviewer 3: I meant to have a version string that not merely indicates the "major" ros version, but also contains an increasing number for each distribution (such that Melodic "1.13" is known to be the next after Lunar "1.12", even when the alphabet runs out after 'Z'). This can be a version string/list, or just having separate major_version and minor_version keys.

> The ros_version does not imply a 1-to-1 mapping to a build tool. The major version of a distro 
> is an "invariant". E.g. the need to install the catkin Debian package in order to have setup files 
> under /opt/ros/<distro> in ROS 1 or existence of a ros-<distro>-ros-workspace package in ROS2

Taking your example: with ROS2 Ardent and Bouncy, you need the existence of a ros-<distro>-ros-workspace package. But maybe with a future ROS2 distribution you would need something else. By relying on a ros_version, you establish a 1-to-1 mapping between the major version and something. Instead, it would be cleaner if there was no logic like "if ros_version == 1 then install catkin debian package". Rather, that decision in the code should depend on a different discriminator, which can either be explicit, or a version key that denominates the version of the prerequisites.

Explicit woud be like "prerequisites: ['catkin_debian_package']", a version key would be like "distribution_format: 'ROS1-catkin'". Using the ROS major version for anything else than display purposes establishes 1-on-1 relationships.

Reviewer 3: Note my concerns are not functionally urgent, so no need to have a longer discussion about it.

> This REP is a revised version of REP 143 [1]_.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This REP is an extension to the distribution file format defined in REP 143 [1]_.
```

Author: Good point. Since the proposed line was too long I didn't accept the suggestion. I also remove "distribution" from the sentence since it might be confusing - because the new REP doesn't change the distribution file format - but only the index file format. See 18e89993ea042ab770f14552bb5999680874d128

Reviewer 4: lgtm

    ``bloom`` will create pull requests against the last distribution file
    since even when the repository is present in any of the other distribution
    files the "overlaying" version should be stored in the last one.

  * release_builds / source_builds / doc_builds: are being removed since they
    only contain information relevant to the buildfarm

* version: version number, this REP describes version 4 (instead of version 3
  described in REP 143 [1]_, version 2 described in REP 141 [2]_ and version 1
  described in REP 137 [3]_)

Reference implementation
------------------------
This REP is to be implemented in version 0.7 of the Python package *rosdistro*.
It will serve as a reference implementation for this REP.
A draft implementation can be found in [4]_.

Compatibility issues
====================

The draft implementation of rosdistro is able to parse multiple index format
versions: 2, 3 as well as 4.

As soon as the new version of 'rosdistro' is released and the ROS 2
distributions have been moved from the forked repository into the
'ros/rosdistro' repository [5]_ the new field is being used to annotate the ROS
2 distributions.

> Any client accessing trying to access the data with an old 'rosdistro'

Reviewer 5: "accessing trying to access" -> "accessing"

Author: Thanks for pointing it out. I ended up using "trying to access" in 10ab7e1d53d6b0e6de4db3c79bab0e63d37ecc0c since the access wouldn't be successful.

The same fix will be necessary in older REPs (141 and 143) - I will change those separately.
